Priority 1-1: A U.S. biomedical research enterprise advisory body,
created by the President of the United States and Congress, to galvanize
national leadership, develop a national strategic vision, and coordinate
efforts and resources.
Priority 1-2: This advisory body could:
• Be composed of leading scientists from a wide variety of disciplines, such
as life, physical, social, and behavioral sciences; engineering; economics; and
the humanities to ensure a convergence science approach to addressing all
emerging needs;
• Engage with multiple relevant federal agencies;
• Be established with long terms;
• Be empowered to set national goals and benchmarks;
• Provide input on resource allocation that matches strategy;
• Consider, examine, and utilize global best practices in all aspects of its work,
but especially as guidance for developing the national strategic vision;
• Include patients, caregivers, and members of the public to provide transparency
and public engagement;
• Have clear, measurable goals and timelines;
• Coordinate with the National Economic Policy Council and the Domestic
Policy Council to ensure the engagement of all relevant stakeholders; and
• Monitor their progress and report to Congress and the American public
annually on their work.
Priority 1-3: The advisory body’s national strategic vision could:
• Directly address the current fragmentation in funding and agenda-setting
present in the U.S. biomedical research enterprise, in concert with the efforts
proposed in Priorities 4-1 and 4-2. The national strategic vision cannot
succeed without coordination and alignment of funding and agenda-setting,
which, conversely, cannot be coordinated and aligned without the guidance of
a national strategic vision. These priorities cannot be separated.
• Set priorities for the use of convergence science and implement a roadmap
for bringing together relevant agencies and scientific disciplines to achieve this
collaborative approach (see also Priority 4-2).
• Consider and propose funding to address:
o Existing and emerging health challenges, including but not limited to
infant and maternal mortality, women’s health concerns, deaths of despair,
obesity, climate change, health disparities, diseases with pandemic potential,
and diseases of aging;
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
The State of the U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise: Strategies for Achieving a Healthier ...
6 | U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise
o Future health threats such as increasing risks of extreme heat and other
natural disasters due to climate change and emerging or existing infectious
diseases;
o Public engagement in the entire U.S. biomedical research enterprise, but
especially focused on increased participation in clinical trials;
o Deteriorating public trust in science and medicine;
o Prioritization and development of new and innovative research approaches
to reduce and eliminate health disparities; and
o The needs of the U.S. biomedical research enterprise workforce, including
adjusting historical pathways to employment or tenure as emerging health
challenges, approaches to science, or the needs of the American public
change.
Streamlined and Coordinated Funding
The United States currently spends the most of any country on research and
development, but peer nations are increasingly dedicating a higher percentage
of their GDP to funding biomedical research. Funding is not everything, but it
does enable research to proceed in a focused, stable, and uninterrupted manner.
A more streamlined approach to funding research and development, guided by a
national body, will help ensure that the U.S. biomedical research enterprise can
reach its full potential.
A variety of funding streams flow into U.S. biomedical research, including
federal, industry, venture capital, and philanthropy—none of which arrives with
“no strings attached.” Industry and venture capital funders are driven primarily
by returns on investments required by their shareholders. Therefore, they will not
or cannot fund a significant portion of biomedical research—particularly early-
stage, curiosity-driven discovery research that is critical for advancing science but
may have a high likelihood of failure or lack the potential for immediate profits.
Alternatively, philanthropy often comes with personal directives that may be
limited in scope. This piecemeal funding, driven by a variety of often conflicting
agendas, makes it difficult to cobble together sufficient capital to comprehensively
address the issues that are most directly impacting Americans.
Relatedly, funding for translating promising basic science into actionable
therapeutics, drugs, or diagnostics is often extremely difficult to secure—leading
to the funding “valley of death.” Many promising breakthroughs often languish
between discovery and translation until their promise is recognized—which
could be years or decades, if at all. The funding valley of death results in significant
waste, because funding and person-power were used to make the discovery,
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
The State of the U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise: Strategies for Achieving a Healthier ...
Executive Summary | 7
but the discovery is not translated into better health for Americans—or is
significantly delayed. Addressing the funding valley of death is critical to ensuring
the continuous improvement of the nation’s health and will add significant value
to what the U.S. biomedical research enterprise is already producing.
To ensure that funding supports the health issues that affect the most Americans
and is used to bridge the funding valley of death, the authors of this Special
Publication propose the following:
Priority 2-1: A federally established national biomedical research funding
collaborative, guided by best practices from existing international
models, and federal determinations of how best to organize and
allocate shared investments from the government, private sector, and
philanthropy. The funding collaborative could be empowered to:
• Analyze successful existing models to develop best practices for the
implementation of new methods for financing and accelerating biomedical
research;
• Create a large-scale funding model to address the health challenges identified
in the national strategic vision; and
• Develop new philanthropic collectives to encourage pooled, strategic gifts that
can make a large impact.
Priority 2-2: Federally developed initiatives and funding strategies to
specifically address the issue of the “funding valley of death” to translate
promising basic research into breakthrough therapies, diagnostics, and
treatments—helping to ensure that the full value of the U.S. biomedical
research enterprise reaches all patients equitably.
Focus on Health Equity
The successes of the U.S. biomedical research enterprise have not reached all
Americans. In fact, some are experiencing increasingly severe health disparities
even while others are enjoying improved health. It is time for the U.S. biomedical
research enterprise to realize its goal of improving health for all Americans and
center health equity in its work.
Racial and ethnic minority groups in the United States experience worse
outcomes in almost every measure of health and wellness compared to their White
counterparts, and women or individuals who identify as women also experience
disproportionate health disparities compared to men or individuals who identify
as men. These disparities are due to a complex web of factors and are difficult to
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
The State of the U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise: Strategies for Achieving a Healthier ...
8 | U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise
untangle, understand, and treat. Research focused on reducing health disparities
is necessary to better understand how to design and test interventions that can
reduce morbidity and mortality for all Americans.
The workforce of the U.S. biomedical research enterprise is also in need of
attention as it remains majority White and male. Increasing the diversity of the
workforce is not only morally right but also will likely improve outcomes for
patients and ensure that research focused on ameliorating health disparities is
conducted comprehensively and respectfully. Just as public input is necessary
to ensure the success of the national strategic vision, researchers who deeply
understand how health and health care are prioritized, viewed, and addressed in
their own communities should be involved in developing successful interventions
and therapeutics.
The U.S. biomedical research enterprise itself also needs to be examined for
issues of equity—specifically regarding the data it collects, aggregates, and uses
for research. These data, which are increasingly used to train artificial intelligence
models and tools, are not diverse, not representative, and may be race insensitive.
Data used throughout the enterprise must represent the actual American populace
to advance health equity, reduce health disparities, and design interventions that
can successfully address the issues of all Americans.
Lastly, the U.S. biomedical research enterprise must invest in understanding
and closing “the last mile”—a critical issue that the authors of this Special
Publication have dubbed the “health equity valley of death.” Closing the last
mile is of equal importance to addressing the funding valley of death because
it prevents America’s most vulnerable populations from accessing care and the
fruits of the U.S. biomedical research enterprise itself. Until the U.S. biomedical
research enterprise can address all Americans’ unique needs and ensure that the
research and products it advances are accessible, it will not have achieved its goal
of improving health for all.
To center health equity in all operations of the U.S. biomedical research
enterprise and make strides to close the health equity valley of death, the authors
of this Special Publication propose the following:
Priority 3-1: Federal prioritization of research that informs solutions
for achieving health equity in the United States, including those focused
on the social determinants of health, diversifying the workforce, and the
U.S. biomedical research enterprise itself. These research areas could
include:
• Increasing trust in medicine, science, and the U.S. biomedical research
enterprise itself;
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
The State of the U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise: Strategies for Achieving a Healthier ...
Executive Summary | 9
• Mitigating structural and systemic discrimination;
• Delivering care to patients and the communities where they reside, using
advances in implementation science to guide these solutions;
• Improving the communication of scientific and medical information; and
• Bolstering community engagement and effective bidirectional dialogue.
Priority 3-2: Federal prioritization of research on the “health equity
valley of death”—closing the last mile—to understand and eliminate
barriers that are preventing the most vulnerable populations in the
United States from receiving and accessing comprehensive, high-quality,
culturally appropriate care. Specific research areas could include:
• The digital divide;
• Improving access to health care, specifically for individuals who cannot afford
adequate or any insurance coverage;
• Transportation barriers;
• “Health care deserts,” or a lack of health care providers—primary and
specialty—in a given geographic area;
• Improving trust in science, medicine, and practitioners of both;
• Providing care outside of clinics and hospitals to meet individuals where they
are; and
• Reducing racism, sexism, and other discriminatory practices that may keep
individuals from seeking care.
Improved Federal Coordination and
Use of Convergence Science
Suggesting that the federal government needs to coordinate better is an often-
recommended improvement; however, for advancing the U.S. biomedical research
enterprise, it is a bedrock action. Improved federal coordination is critically
necessary for the operation and success of the advisory body and national
strategic vision proposed in Priorities 1-1, 1-2, and 1-3 as well as the success of
the funding collaborative proposed in Priority 2-1. Implementing these priorities
will also ensure more effective and cohesive functioning of all aspects of the U.S.
biomedical research enterprise.
Improved federal coordination will also enable the deployment of convergence
science to solve the pernicious health challenges currently facing the American
public. A National Research Council report defined convergence science as “an
approach to problem-solving that integrates expertise from life sciences with
physical, mathematical, and computational sciences, medicine, and engineering”
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
The State of the U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise: Strategies for Achieving a Healthier ...
10 | U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise
as well as social, behavioral, and economic sciences “to form comprehensive
synthetic frameworks that merge areas of knowledge from multiple fields to
address specific challenges” (NRC, 2014). The report specifically notes that “[a]n
enhanced and expanded partnership among convergence practitioners … in the
life, physical, and engineering sciences, the economic, social, and behavioral
science and humanities research communities, and institutional leaders could be
invaluable” (NRC, 2014). The authors of this Special Publication agree. Siloed
funding and research agendas, by their nature, prohibit collaboration across federal
agencies and areas of expertise—both of which are necessary to solve increasingly
complex health issues such as obesity, deaths of despair, and the health impacts of
climate change.
Federal coordination and advancement of convergence science will also facilitate
the use of public–private partnerships, which provide tremendous opportunities
to accelerate discovery and development. Public–private partnerships were
implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic, often to great success, but
should not be relegated to times of crisis. They should be thoughtfully deployed
to address emerging and chronic diseases as well.
To encourage federal coordination and deploy convergence science across all
areas of need, the authors of this Special Publication propose the following:
Priority 4-1: Federal requirement and facilitation of necessary and
essential coordination across government agencies, especially the
National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation,
as well as external parties, to enable the use of convergence science,
coordinate funding and strategy, adequately address the increasingly
complex and interconnected health challenges facing the nation, and
promote information sharing.
Priority 4-2: Federal promotion and use of convergence science in all
appropriate projects receiving federal funding.
21st-Centur y Workforce
To ensure that the U.S. biomedical research enterprise can continue to produce
effective therapeutics, drugs, and diagnostics, it must attract the smartest and
most dedicated scientists, researchers, and support staff. However, growth in the
biomedical workforce has slowed compared to America’s peer nations. Structural
compensation, education, and training issues have reached a tipping point and
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
The State of the U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise: Strategies for Achieving a Healthier ...
Executive Summary | 11
must be addressed before the United States loses competitive applicants to other
fields or nations.
International students, scientists, and scholars have contributed significantly to the
U.S. biomedical research enterprise. In 2019, more than 4,000 individuals holding
temporary visas in the United States were awarded bachelor’s degrees in biological
sciences; more than 2,500 were awarded master’s degrees; and almost 2,000 were
awarded doctoral degrees (Trapani and Hale, 2022). Many of these graduates remain
in the country for the rest of their professional careers. The biomedical research
enterprise must ensure that the United States remains a welcoming and accessible
country for international scholars to live, learn, and work.
Fragmented and flat funding for biomedical research also directly impacts
the workforce and may influence scientists who are considering careers in
biomedical research. The static availability of federal funding may lead to a more
cautious approach toward awards, likely harming early-career scientists the most.
A coordinated and strategic approach to funding would enable prospective
members of the workforce to clearly understand where priorities lie and tailor
their research and proposals, if possible.
Lastly, compensation and benefits for entering biomedical research must
be raised to parity with similar positions, or the United States will risk losing
qualified applicants to industry or academia. Postdoctoral positions regularly pay
$15,000 less than comparative positions. Postdoctoral positions—depending on
the source of funding—can also vary in access to standard benefits. While most
offer health insurance, other benefits such as disability, retirement, or paid leave
are not as common. The math here is simple—pay and benefits for these positions
must be equivalent to their peer positions, or qualified individuals will move to
where the money is.
To ensure a competitive, committed, and well-compensated U.S. biomedical
research workforce, the authors of this Special Publication propose the following:
Priority 5: Steps by the federal government and Congress to increase the
competitiveness of the U.S. biomedical research enterprise workforce,
including the following key priorities:
• Align the U.S. biomedical research enterprise’s national strategic vision with
the needs of its workforce and set goals to meet those needs;
• Incentivize and implement appropriate, specialized, and necessary education
and training for all levels of the U.S. biomedical research workforce—
including a reinvigorated focus on K–12 science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics education to reinforce the pipeline at its earliest stages;
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
The State of the U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise: Strategies for Achieving a Healthier ...
12 | U.S. Biomedical and Health Research Enterprise
• Remove barriers that may prevent full accommodation and integration of
international scientists into the U.S. biomedical research enterprise workforce,
including expanding eligibility for federal research funding to temporary visa
holders;
• Expand Early-Stage Investigator funding opportunities, particularly for
physician-scientists, to help stabilize the career-launch phase of becoming an
independent investigator;
• Reclassify federally funded postdoctoral scholars as employees and provide full
benefits to remove unpredictability and make these positions more attractive,
including the following potential approaches:
o Significantly shortening the duration of postdoctoral training so that
scholars gain independence faster,
o Allowing postdoctoral scholars to apply for their own federal funding, and
o Creating PhD-to-faculty positions, which would provide new pathways to
stable employment;
• Promote the importance of physician-scientists to the biomedical research
enterprise and support their training, education, and professional work,
including the following potential approaches:
o Expanding and increasing scholarships specifically for physician-scientists,
o Protecting research time and salary support,
o Connecting postdoctoral scholars with mentors, and
o Employing innovative and immersive training and research programs; and
• Prioritize and implement innovative approaches to recruiting and retaining
the specialized workforce, including by expanding student loan forgiveness,
providing new funding modalities for postdoctoral trainees, and creating early
career development awards for new investigators seeking to pursue research
fields prioritized by the national strategic vision.
The authors of this Special Publication believe in the strength, power, and impact
of the U.S. biomedical research enterprise to support the economy and improve
health for all. The actions laid out in this Special Publication, when taken together,
will provide the foundation for the U.S. biomedical research enterprise of the future.
As a nation, we have already contributed so much—financially, professionally, and
personally—to support and advance the enterprise. We owe it to ourselves—
and our children and grandchildren—to ensure that biomedical research, conducted
effectively, efficiently, and strategically, is benefiting all of America.